---
title: "The Martian"
author: Leia Fannin
date: '2017-12-09'
categories:
  - Leia
---

The movie "The Martian" ( starring Matt Damon) is a wonderful movie that has earned comments such as "Epic" and "The best movie on this or any other planet". Based on a #1 New York Times bestselling novel, this science fiction movie is one of the coolest movies I have ever seen. "The Martian" is funnily enough rated PG-13 (parental guidence under the age of 13, for those who don't already know). However, the martian is pretty appropriate, exept for some swearing and the fact you see someones butt. Parents who do not read "Leia's Movie Reviews"- I would strongly reccomend you checked out the movie before you watch.

"The Martian" is a movie about Mars, if you haven't already figured that out for yourself. I quote the back of the disk when I say this: "During a manned mission to Mars, American astronaut Mark Watney (Played by Mark Damon) is presumed dead and left  behind by his crew. But Watney is still alive and he must now find a way to contact Earth-and survive on a barren planet with meager supplies-in the hope that an international team of scientists can devise a near-impossoble rescue plan to bring him home!" 

And now Dad is going to write his opinion on "The Martian". Dad, take it away.

Having made two of the most iconic and influential science fiction films in history (Alien and Blade Runner), Ridley Scott can get away with setting a movie on a harsh planetary landscape and have it feel grounded. Mars is a planet close to ours and one which needs no explaining, but - from Edgar Rice Burroughs, to Brian de Palma, to Bugs Bunny - "Mars" and "Martians" have a legacy where science fiction is concerned. Scott's interest here, though, is not in little green men. The danger is realistic and relatable. Will Matt Damon starve? Can he get enough oxygen to breathe? The mortal danger comes - not from an alien with acid for blood - but from the viability of a crop of potatoes. So, when Matt Damon faces the camera and boldly states, "I'm going to have to science the s*** out of this", the s-word which matters is "science".  Although this remains a work of science _fiction_, it works more importantly as a celebration of the science that makes imaginative worlds possible. For Scott, the film maker, it may be read as a statement of purpose.

And he nails it. The narrative premise is a well-worn one: last man on Earth (sorry, Mars), fish out of water, castaway, survival story. These elements are made fresh through their connection to our present day institutions, first and foremost NASA's exploration of space. Though a manned mission to Mars has not been planned, there are human artifacts on the planet and the plot hinges on Damon's use of one of them. Further, nerds (like me) will be delighted at how prominently hexadecimal notation is featured in the film. (Although, I would have loved if there just a brief explanation of why it existed at all.) Damon spends a good deal of time talking about how to grow plants on the planet and few details are spared. When he MacGuyvers a flame-dependent device to alter the environment, we see the actual burns earned from the first false starts. 

The film works less well in its study of human conflict. Jeff Daniels is the sort of beurocrat that Scott and many other films love to hate. (One sees echoes of Paul Reiser's morally bankrupt company man from Aliens. Yes, I know that wasn't a Ridley Scott movie.) I would have loved to see Daniels' choices given a bit more context. Damon gives voice to the human cost of space exploration in a moving (for this parent, anyway) message to his mother and father. But space exploration has cost lives and the decisions made by people on the ground may risk the safety of people in orbit. Daniels is a character who may lean too heavily on this cost. I only wish the film had given some extra dimension to his moral calculus. Ditto the reactions of Damon's crewmates, who see the extra sacrifices involved in a rescue attempt as a question with an obvious answer. 

But these complaints are minor. As a celebration of the risks, triumphs and _reasons_ for man's exploration of space, The Martian is a great success. As scientists on the ground and in space begin cobbling together a plan to bring Damon home, we hear almost the entirety of David Bowie's "Starman". Soft hearted engineers will all have a good cry. And when they go to bed perhaps they'll dream - not of aliens or far flung galaxies - but of human settlements on a world so very close to our own. Triumphi scientia.
